The fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda) is a species in the order Lepidoptera and is the larval life stage of a fall armyworm moth. 
The term "armyworm" can refer to several species, often describing the large-scale invasive behavior of the species' larval stage. 
It is regarded as a pest and can damage and destroy a wide variety of crops, which causes large economic damage. 
Its scientific name derives from frugiperda, which is Latin for lost fruit, named because of the species' ability to destroy crops.
Because of its propensity for destruction, the fall armyworm's habits and possibilities for crop protection have been studied in depth. 
It is also a notable case for studying sympatric speciation, as it appears to be diverging into two species currently.
 Another remarkable trait of the larva is that they practice cannibalism.

The fall armyworm is active at a different time of year than the true armyworm, another species in the order Lepidoptera and family Noctuidae, but of the genus Mythimna. 
Outbreaks of the true armyworm usually occur during the early part of the summer; the fall armyworm does most damage in the late summer in the southern part of the United States, and early fall in the northern regions.



Description

The adult moths are 32 to 40 mm wing tip to wing tip, with a brown or gray forewing, and a white hind wing. 
There is slight sexual dimorphism, with males having more patterns and a distinct white spot on each of their forewings. 
The first larval instar is light colored with a larger dark head. 
As they develop through instars, they become browner with white lengthwise lines. 
They also develop dark spots with spines.

Geographic range
The fall armyworm is widely distributed in Eastern and Central North America and in South America. 
It has been invasive in Africa since 2016. 
It cannot overwinter in below freezing temperatures, so it only survives the winter in the most southern regions of the United States, namely Texas and Florida. 
Because of this, the fall armyworm is a more prominent pest in southeastern states. 
However, seasonally it will spread across the eastern United States and up to southern Canada, inhabiting areas with suitable food supplies.

The potential global distribution of S. frugiperda has been modelled using CLIMEX. 
The modelled global potential distribution reflects the marked seasonal range dynamics experienced in North America, with much of the potential range in Europe, South Africa, China and Australia consisting of habitat that is only climatically suitable during the warmer months.

Invasive spread
It was first reported in Africa in 2016, where it is causing significant damage to maize crops and has great potential for further spread and economic damage.
It has since spread to 28 countries in Africa.
In 2018, it began to spread widely in India.
In January 2019, a heavy infestation of fall armyworm was recorded in corn plantations of Sri Lanka.

The pest was first detected in China in the southwest province of Yunnan in January 2019.
Through 2019, the pest infested a total of 26 provinces.
The armyworm is expected in 2020 to hit China's Northeast wheat belt.
A report issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs rates the situation as "very grave".

In February 2020 S. frugiperda was detected in Queensland, Australia. [15] It was observed in traps baited with a male pheromone lure, firstly on Erub and Saibai islands in the Torres Strait, and subsequently on the mainland near Croyden. Within a week it was officially declared ineradicable.
